Guiding principles for BLISS (#1259)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/model_design/general_reference_material/bliss/index.rst

1.1 Guiding Principles
----------------------

Our guiding principles for this document can be summarized in three points:  

**1. This work is important**

Inclusive language use is important, and we want to begin by acknowledging the 
potential harm that using gendered language can create. ‘Sex’ and ‘gender’ are 
not synonymous, unidimensional traits. [Bauer_2022]_ acknowledges this and explains 
how common sex and gender proxies such as chromosomes or sex organs are imperfect 
and not fully inclusive of lived experiences.  

> Using imperfect proxies can create real harm by alienating individuals, and by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using imperfect proxies and gendered language can create real harm by alienating individuals, and by 
```

> Using imperfect proxies can create real harm by alienating individuals, and by 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using imperfect proxies can create harm by alienating individuals, and by 
```
no need to risk it sounding like we are embellishing or undercuting this

creating invalid research. People who are not cisgendered (a diverse group including 
intersex, nonbinary, transgender and other gender nonconforming individuals) experience 

> gendered language frequently which can be alienating and cause harm. These individuals 

Reviewer: I think this last sentence (starting with 'People who are not cis...') could actually be removed, it feels a little redundant to me.

Author: Fair! I combined with with the sentence below and shortened them to just include the examples rather than statement and then separately examples.

> gendered language frequently which can be alienating and cause harm. These individuals 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
People who are intersex, transgender, nonbinary, and/or have other gender-nonconforming identities
```

might be less likely to interact with healthcare, see themselves in research, and lose 
opportunities as a result. In an effort to work toward institution-wide DEI goals and 
advance our team’s research and publications, we created this guide to explore the 
concepts of sex and gender and offer inclusive language alternatives.  

One example of how proxy measures can affect the validity of research is in [Bauer_2022]_, 
where researchers used 'women' as a proxy for people with a uterus. The researchers were 
trying to find the incidence of uterine cancer, but by using 'women' as the denominator, 
even though not all women have a uterus, cancer rates were thought to be lower than was true 

> in real lif. This was especially prominent in Black women who are more likely to have had 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in real life. This was especially prominent in Black women who are more likely to have had 
```

a hysterectomy. This example highlights the importance of using a measure that is actually 
tied to the research question.  

A second example of the potential impact on research validity is equating differences in 
results to only sex or gender. As explained in [Ritz_and_Greaves_2022]_, both sex and gender 
can lead to biological changes and untangling these pathways is complex or impossible. Often, 

> researchers will report findings as "sex differences" implying that they are a result of sex, 
> when the possibility that gendered behavior or norms was the cause was never explored. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
researchers will report findings as "sex differences," implying that they are a result of sex, 
without exploring the role of gendered behavior or norms.
```

Nothing wrong here, just found this sentence a bit hard to follow!

Lastly, we hope to inspire change in other researchers by presenting our studies with gender 
inclusive language and model practices we believe in. For all of these reasons, we feel this 
guide is very important.  

**2. This work is evolving**

Language is constantly evolving, so there is rarely a single “right” choice and the accepted 
choice may evolve over time. Therefore, this guide will be a living document that we will 

> regularly review and update. We will hold ourselves accountable for aligning the guide with 

Reviewer 2: Do we have a date somewhere to note when we have last updated the doc? I guess it is all logged in git, but it might be good to include it in the readthedocs version explicitly.

the current preferred language, terminology and approaches.  

> While we hope this can be up to date and comprehensive, no guide can anticipate every use case, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While we hope this can be up-to-date and comprehensive, no guide can anticipate every use case, 
```

recognize every limitation, or be applicable to every research question. We aim to provide enough 
information that users can understand the spirit of the guide and apply that to their unique needs.  

**3. This is work**

We acknowledge that there is a cost associated with a transition to gender inclusive language 
practices from standard, gendered language. Although using gender inclusive language is work, 
we highlight here that there are many benefits to incorporating more inclusive language into 
everyday public health research practices.  

> Gender inclusive language can often by longer or more verbose than gendered language, but we 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gender inclusive language can often be longer or more verbose than gendered language, but we 
```

5.0 References
++++++++++++++

> .. [Bauer_2022]

Reviewer 3: Yep, it was the spaces that was making these not work 👍 And now that you've actually referenced them above, Sphinx won't complain about them being here without being cited.
